Hello ladies and gentlemen, and welcome to The Right Opinion, the home of a twat with too much free time,
and YouTube drama comes in many different forms. In the last few months, a lot of my videos have focused on these
situations that have spanned over years, and although a drama may reach its peak in a way that catches people off guard,
if you look at the history, normally you'll see a pattern of conflict and attention from other commentators that has contributed to
a climax of sorts. However, drama can often be even more shocking when it happens out of nowhere, when people think that
actually a certain channel may be the last place to end up spiralling so dramatically, and that's what appeared to be the case
with today's subject, the channel named Danplan.
Now, when a lot of people reached out to me about this situation, I will admit, I was not familiar with Danplan,
and in spite of their approximately 2 million strong fanbase, many of my friends were not familiar with their content either,
so I sat down and watched a lot of Danplan, and tried to immerse myself in their content.
Now I think I have a decent grasp, I will briefly summarise their origins and style, so people have a grip on how they
created such a significant following. Danplan as a channel was established in July 2014 by their titular creators,
Daniel and his friend Hosuh, with the first upload coming soon after, delightfully named, by the way, Moral of the Pooping Robber.
And I know, I know, I know what you're thinking, you're thinking, why is Joe fighting a dude with a weapon?
Wait, wait, wait, I can do better, I can do better. Why is Joe fighting a dude with a weapon?
But you have to realise that Joe is extremely strong, even today when he slaps me in the back to say hi in a friendly manner,
it feels like this.
This was the first instalment of their By The Way series, and this video consisted of a rather crudely drawn
character discussing a story told by his youth pastor, in which this pastor encountered a series of burglaries
conducted by a robber who defecated following each incident. Now the audio could be a tad better, and this video
only appears to include Dan's commentary, but you can definitely see the origins of a great channel in the making,
a lot of Hosuh's creative illustrations enhance Dan's stories on a comedic basis, and Dan's outgoing nature
makes him an effective storyteller, there was definitely potential here.
However, this series wouldn't receive much attention following its initial upload, animation was in a bit of a lull at that point,
Daniel and Hosuh were busy people, and thus it was probably not worth putting too many eggs in that basket.
After this, Dan Plan spent just under a couple years dedicated to gaming content, which was much more popular at the time.
These gaming videos weren't the most unique, though they were often presented more like highlight reels,
and used character heads to represent different people talking, and to try and give it a unique energy.
Dan was the consistent host of these videos, gaming with a varying roster of guests such as Anna, Billie, Jay, and of course, Hosuh.
However, there was one more character to introduce to the story, that person goes by the name of Steven.
Steven was introduced on the 5th of September 2015, in the upload Yamate, Titan Senpai,
in which he and of course Dan and Hosuh play the Attack on Titan tribute game.
Like Hosuh and many of their other friends, they were acquainted through school and college,
and for these comrades, this was just a regular gaming session which happened to be uploaded onto YouTube.
Steven was not one of the original members, but he quickly became a recurring guest on the channel as other individuals began to appear less.
However, these gaming videos, although enjoyable for those who participated, didn't set the channel on fire, gaining Dan Plan only 50 subscribers.
So come May 2016, the By the Way series was resumed, but this time with a slightly different format.
Daniel- Alright, let me tell you a story about the time when my final exams ended.
Steven- Wait, wait, wait. Daniel- So, why are you telling you a story?
In this video, Daniel tries to tell a story, but is occasionally interrupted by his friends.
Initially requesting justification for the change in direction, and then reacting to his outlandish story regarding the time,
he discovered a variety of condoms under a person's bed.
It was a rough idea of what he had planned for these videos, and over the next few uploads he would continue to refine this brand.
In his By the Way Would You Rather, he incorporates his friends, providing them with a more prominent role.
In this instance, the friends were Hosuh and Jay, another person who regularly appeared on the channel.
By the next video, however, the person appearing alongside Dan and Hosuh was Steven, and he became the principal third contributor to this content.
Now, as any creator knows, these videos will not take off immediately, at least most videos won't.
However, within the year they had their first hit, By the Way, Are You A Psychopath?
Now, it's quite easy to work out why this video did well, it's a punchy title, it's a popular topic, and it's a striking thumbnail,
and they probably had some pretty impressive watch time too.
At this point, animation videos had begun to pick up significant traction, so there was really no better time to blow up,
and over the months and years following, they would do just that.
Like their psychopath video, a lot of their content integrated anecdotal style games,
which would often present a challenge and ask the participants to make a decision,
which would then lead to various consequences and banter alike.
It's engaging to watch and often quite interactive, I would find myself pausing the videos to see if I could work out these questions or mysteries myself,
and as their channel grew, their chemistry seemed to develop as well.
And thus they established their brand, Daniel, Hosuh, and Steven.
By the way, but more importantly, DanPlan.
Their content had mass appeal, the topics were timeless, with great rewatch value,
and there was a legitimate chemistry that was rooted in a transcendent bond thanks to organic friendships
that one cannot simply cultivate for mere business purposes.
What could possibly go wrong? Well, a lot.
Hey guys. Sorry, but there won't be a stream this week.
But I did want to give you guys an explanation about me and DanPlan and just the future of this channel.
So as the title of the video says, I've quit DanPlan.
Join me today as we analyze DanPlan, what exactly went down, what exactly people said, what exactly went wrong,
and if there's any way to write it.
And maybe if I'm feeling a bit charitable, I'll garnish this spicy dish with a few right opinions here and there.
I want to also clarify that due to the chronological order of this drama,
I'll be going over one side before the other.
So if it looks unfavourable towards an individual, sit tight, we'll get there.
Without further ado, I suggest we dive right in.
As said, the three people central to the DanPlan channel were Daniel, Hosuh, and Steven.
Over the years, they established a reputation that was essential to the brand they were creating,
as a collective, and as individuals.
By the way, it became a primary brand, and it often became interchangeable with the DanPlan channel for many audience members.
Within DanPlan, these characters had their appeal.
Dan as the strong anchor for the content and direction of discussion, Hosuh as the precious spirit of innocence,
and Steven as the slightly darker, more twisted Geezer.
Geezer- Can I just leave the country?
Steven- No leaving the country, that's too easy.
Geezer- Too easy.
Hosuh- I think I'd go to school.
Steven- Well, I mean, I can f*** up schools too.
Geezer- It's not just in America, not just in America!
Geezer- I can say that in public, so I won't take that out.
Steven- It's the purge, okay? It's on the purge.
With this in mind, even though the channel was owned by Dan and Hosuh,
it gave many viewers the impression it was a mutual venture.
There were a couple videos which deviated from the By The Way style,
and those were probably more restricted to Dan and Hosuh,
but as many people tended to conflate the By The Way series with the DanPlan channel,
it would be easy to receive the impression that they all had a somewhat similar stake.
2019 was an incredibly successful year for the DanPlan squad.
They hit 1 million subscribers, they hit 2 million subscribers,
they released a ton of merch, launched a Discord server,
there was a lot to celebrate, but come 2020, it would all change.
On January the 4th, DanPlan released a video called By The Way, Can You Become a Superhero?
The video is fairly routine.
Dan- Steven, you've seen to the future, a person's about to get hit by the bus.
Three, f*** the tires of the bus.
Geezer- The tires of the bus hits, the bus rolls, f*** 20 people inside.
Geezer- Oh my god, man!
Dan- Save the elderly, that was my objective, saving the elderly, that's all that matters.
Unsuspecting Dan fans, hehe, didn't notice much.
However, the video was ominously labelled Final Episode, and judging by the shock of many people
in light of what happened next, gives me the impression that people assumed the subtitle
didn't mean the end of DanPlan's series, but more the end of the two parts which they had titled
in such a way before.
However, less than 5 hours later, Steven, a third of By The Way, formally announced in a video
that he was going to be departing DanPlan.
Now, that's obviously shocking for many reasons, but people leave shows, people leave groups,
people move on, that's what you expect.
What people didn't expect was the explanation, normally you have some quaintly written letter
thanking people for the good times and memories, and I'm not doubting that Steven didn't have
some of his own, but they were not the focus of this video, he had a greater issue to discuss.
This isn't gonna be a Daniel exposed video, but I did want you all to know about how this all started.
Daniel himself.
Let's break the video down.
Announcing that he had formally left in mid-December, Steven takes us back to the start, and breaks
down his role on the channel.
I have already explained a fair bit of this, but Steven emphasises that he was not part
of the channel at first, and he only became involved when Hosuh proposed a third member,
which became particularly integral when DanPlan transitioned from gaming to more character-driven
animation videos.
Our unique theme and on-camera personalities meshed so well, and that's probably why we
got so popular so fast.
The three of us and our dynamic was just remarkable, and the way we float off of each other is still
something that amazes me looking back.
Then he talks about their success, and how their dynamic concept and delivery all contributed
to it.
He talks about the scale of the success and his own reaction.
Nonetheless, he has never considered it more than a hobby, him establishing a role in the
success and how he has perceived it sets up his next point, which would be the treatment
and credit that he has received.
It's no secret that I've never thought of YouTube as anything other than a hobby.
Even now with Actually Steven, I still don't consider it a job, but Daniel did, which brings
me to this year, and why friends and business don't mix.
This is where the first issue comes in, as a main voice on the channel, and someone who
was involved in the presentation, he felt proportionally he deserved more than he was
receiving from Danplan.
He accepts that he's not quite as involved, but in the month where he states the Chow
was making five figures, he had only received a total of $225.
We can assume this occurred around early 2019, as he stated the upcoming instant due to this
happened around nine months prior to him quitting in December.
Now, to receive such a meager wage in return felt insulting to him.
However, for many, a problem like this between friends wouldn't be publicised unless he had
attempted to find a compromise himself.
Unfortunately, this attempted resolution led to a very angry two-day dispute between
Daniel and Steven, in which Steven requested a 20% share of the channel.
Daniel not only rejected this proposal, but the dispute resulted in what many view as
Daniel's most objectionable statements.
So me and Daniel argued for hours over the course of two days.
But then I asked Daniel, what could I do to increase my share in Danplan?
And everything just imploded.
He said nothing, you're just an employee, you have no share.
And that statement has stuck with me ever since we fought, and it hasn't gone away.
At this point, Steven proceeds to directly respond to the statement, once again re-emphasising
his contribution, and then contrasting it with Daniel's statement, to highlight its
disrespectful nature.
He then proceeds to say at that point he planned on quitting, but wanted to stay due to multiple
reasons, including Hosuh's attempt to resolve the strained relationships, the fact that
Steven enjoyed the fame and attention, but primarily because he wanted to prove himself
worthy of having more of a share, more of a position on the channel.
However, the more he vied for that approval, the more he came to the realisation that it
was ultimately unattainable.
And so, for the past nine months, I tried.
God knows I tried.
Every recording session, I brought my humour, my edge to the table.
But I fought a losing battle.
The more effort I put into developing my character, developing Steven, I realised how
little Daniel valued it.
Formal Mafia Steven, Huggy Zombie Apocalypse Steven, Mmm Hosuh Steven.
Daniel didn't give me a script to do those characters, I made them up, and I made my
personalities enjoyable.
But to Daniel, every recording session, I was merely talking to friends.
To him, I wasn't putting in any effort into the videos.
Every recording session, I wanted to swear at Daniel for real, to yell at him so much
that I had to stop talking sometimes or else I might say something I would regret the next
day.
And that feeling only grew each session until the last recording in November that we did,
where I finally just zoned out and stopped trying at all.
Nine months ago, when we argued, I asked Dan how many views on our videos were garnered
by me.
He said he didn't have an answer.
A few weeks ago, I asked him the same question again, and his answer didn't change.
So I know that no matter how hard I try, no matter how many personalities I perfect,
Daniel will never consider me an equal on the channel.
So I quit.
Stephen ends with some rather somber messages, stating that people should know their own
worth on the channel because Daniel won't recognise it otherwise, and that ultimately
he regrets being a part of DanPlan, because he still believes he'd call Dan a friend if
he'd not involved himself with the channel in the first place.
Sad.
There are a lot of messages to break down within this video, but we can't say too much
currently, as there are still many more perspectives to analyse, and conflicting points of view.
What I will say is that in light of this video, a majority of people believed him, but they
weren't necessarily hostile towards Daniel.
They more passed on the message that as it stood, they were upset with him, but would
like to hear his side nonetheless.
However, before that could happen, there were a few more hammers to fall, and we'll get
into that right now.
Approximately a week after his video, Stephen conducted a two-hour stream, which obviously
made me very happy, as it was more material for me to sit through.
Thank you, Stephen.
But jokes aside, there are some key details here, even if you have to sift through a lot
of the casual discussion, though I am going to be reserving some details for later discourse.
Now, at this point, Daniel had not responded yet, and had not replied to any of Stephen's
messages seeking resolution, leading to a significant amount of frustration.
Stephen felt uncertain as to Dan's state, so had decided to proceed with this live stream
where he talks more about the conditions surrounding the situation.
Let me preface this entire stream by saying, I have reached out to Daniel.
I talked- I tried to talk to him yesterday, just so I can give him some time between getting
like all this drama dropped on him, and then like him actually wanting to talk to me.
So I tried to give him like at least some time, and in that time, I was hoping that
he would post something, or at least try to dispel the things I said in my video.
But it's just been total silence from him, and I'm not sure what else to do at this point.
So I'll just give my side of the story, and if it somehow overlaps with his,
feel free to, I guess, disprove them, Daniel.
There's a lot to digest here, and I would obviously recommend watching it yourself,
if you're truly interested in what he said. A lot of it is relating to feelings that he's had
following the video, how he's coping, what he's planning to do when Dan responds, and so on,
and a few more personal questions, such as whether he believed YouTube changed Dan,
of which you can probably guess Stephen's answer. However, there are a few interesting points here,
the first one was regarding pay. According to Stephen, poster as co-owner was originally being
paid on a 50-50 split with Dan, however, at some point in 2017, the split was altered,
so that Dan received 85% to Hosuh's 15. Quite the change.
and then just paid out whoever with the 100%, which is insane to me. Hosuh probably has reasons
for it, but it was just insane that I heard that. And then I asked him, hey Hosuh, how much
have you been paid? And he said, 28,000. Okay, so let's assume that 28,000 is 15% of the total
revenue, not even just like gross, like the total amount, it's just the amount that Daniel has made.
So let's say, okay, so 28,000, 15%, do some like multiplication and division,
you end up with about $40,000 made in revenue, which is exactly the same as the Social Blade
midpoint. The more I dove into it, the more I realized how many more people were being screwed.
This is not just a me problem anymore. When I started digging,
I started asking the animators, how much were you getting paid? And the answers kept being the same,
about $450 per month. For a month of work, they get $450, and it's not even consistent,
because sometimes it takes more than a month to make a video, but you still get $450.
Now, Stephen states in the description that this comment was actually incorrect, and although he
got the details right, he got the maths wrong. Hosuh actually made 42,000 Canadian dollars,
which means by estimates of the share, Dan would have comparatively made 280,000. He also calls out
Dan for paying the animators who work for him $450 a month while on quote full time hours,
in spite of the observed money he was making. Stephen uses Social Blade to back up his
statements here, we'll hold these thoughts until later.
Stephen- Daniel has essentially trapped any animator who actually wants to make a living,
just by paying them like slave wages, while still making them work full time.
One more point relates to the individual by the name of Jay. Now, Jay had appeared on Dan
Plan's channel multiple times, often alongside Stephen. In this video, there is an air of
uncertainty about Jay's role, however, one thing that many have observed were the similarities
between Jay's and Stephen's personalities, leading many to theorise that Dan was planning
on replacing Stephen with Jay altogether. Stephen says he feels that after the confrontation in
early 2019, Dan was looking to do just that, as his mannerisms were very popular. However,
Stephen didn't feel that Jay was a specific replacement, as he believed that no one could
truly emulate his style. Stephen also discloses that Jay was being paid nothing whatsoever,
which was surprising for many considering the numerous appearances he had made on the channel
as well, although he was just a guest. Stephen- I knew for a fact that Daniel was trying to
replace me after the fight that we had back in March, after the March incident.
And I think because of that, it made me see like people around me as my replacements.
Do I think Jay was a replacement? No. No one can emulate this greatness.
So yeah, I don't think Jay was a replacement for anyone.
However, the specifics were still shrouded in mystery. One thing that seemed prevalent in this
case was the lack of evidence. A lot of what we'd heard up to this point was either party
testimonies, or third party comments relayed through Stephen. This was also probably given
that a lot of the anecdotes were based on verbal interactions, and obviously one doesn't typically
think to record calls, it's not really considered kosher, so many people were eagerly awaiting
Dan's response, and it was coming. But then to the stage left an unexpected guest, Jay himself.
Now, Jay had been commenting on the situation from the sidelines, however, on the 17th of January,
days before Dan would release his own response, Jay makes his video titled Why I say I'm not a part
of DanPlan. Now, I'll add the disclaimer that this video is currently private, and we'll discuss that
towards the end, but before we indulge in those details, we should probably investigate what the
video exactly says. To summarise, it basically does what it says on the tin, with a bit more to
boot. He opens it up with the acknowledgement that he's not as invested in it as other parties,
but felt an inclination to contribute due to his position. He talks background about his
relationship with Dan, why he was restricted in his commitment, stating that everything
seemed fine until July 2019, a few months after Dan's confrontation with Stephen.
So it's around this time, I guess, so July 2019, that I started to get a hunch or a feeling.
I had a hunch that something was off with DanPlan channel internally.
So I decided to do a small investigation privately, and when Dan found out about it
that I was digging, he adamantly tried to make me drop it. He did not want me to dig around.
And that is when I learned several extremely dangerous issues.
In July 2019, Jay states that he began investigating some of the apparent internal issues of the channel,
but when Daniel found out, he became quite agitated, and determined to steer attention away from these
problems. However, according to Jay, this just led to more problems surfacing. Firstly, that of pay.
Jay attests that when initially splitting the channel revenue, Dan split the revenue 50-50 with
Hosuh in a purposeful attempt to block out Stephen. He states that when asking about this, Dan decided
to deflect this decision onto various reasoning which did not appear particularly watertight.
Dan later reasoned that the reason Stephen was left out was that Stephen was very uncaring about
the YouTube project. The example Dan gave to me was that Stephen would be on his phone during
the recording. I actually confirmed that was Stephen, that it only happened twice, and both
occurred during a very long recording session, lasting 4 hours. One with the Hunger Game, and one
with the Mafia. Stephen would also not do much in terms of the channel with editing, etc. But
I'm pretty sure a lot of you Dan plan followers might know, Stephen had an incredibly massive
influence at this point. He had a massive audience. He also clears up the changing of the
share, stating Hosuh didn't want any money and wanted it invested back in the channel,
yet Daniel continued to pass on a share to Hosuh regardless. Hosuh specifically told Dan that
Hosuh did not want the channel money. Hosuh wanted Dan to use the money to grow the channel,
but Dan later essentially pushed the money onto Hosuh for at least 15%, so the Dan plan revenue
was split 85 to Dan, 15 to Hosuh. That's just a side note. So Stephen, and of course Stephen,
zero. He goes on to talk about the incident where Stephen finds out about the money that Dan's
making from the channel, and goes on to demand 20%. He also says this, which is curious.
Stephen approached Dan about it later, about the monetary issue, and Stephen requested 20%
of the channel share. Dan might say that it's 33%, that is not true. Stephen himself
requested 20%. Something to keep in mind. So during these negotiations, Jay states that
Daniel rejected Stephen's proposals wholly, obviously referencing the employee quotes.
Currently Jay isn't saying anything particularly revelational in its implications, but 10 minutes
in, it becomes a bit more implicative. I suggest we delve into that right now.
Now I don't want to go through this video step by step, because for some people who will be
familiar with the video already, that wouldn't be particularly helpful. So what I'm going to talk
about is how the video characterises Dan, and which situations Jay uses to back these claims
up. The first point that people in this situation thus far attested to is the
notion of the lack of empathy on Dan's part, which has led to hurtful things being said,
and Jay stays pretty consistent on this basis. He dives into how Daniel views the idea of shares.
On the basis of Dan's employee comments, Jay decides to break down exactly why those comments
were made, and the disparity between Stephen and Daniel's perspectives on a person's position
in a business. Stephen's not dumb, and to be honest, he's one of the probably the smarter
people that I met. He knows his self value, he knows his worth. The critical mistake that
Dan makes at this point wasn't just rejecting the share proposal and then gutting it to zero,
it's the implications behind that action. He had a very different unconventional definition
for shares. For Dan, a share was something precious that only the originals could get.
I just want to make a note that Dan's definition fluctuates greatly. Dan's definition of share
doesn't even revolve around money. It's just a special title under a special law.
Are you an original? No, then you get nothing. That was Dan's mindset.
So even if Stephen was there when Dan physically made the channel, just by the virtue of Stephen
not doing enough in Dan's eyes, Stephen's original title was withdrawn without even Stephen knowing.
So when Dan told Stephen that he's getting 0%, Dan implicitly told Stephen not only that is he worth
0% towards DanPlan, that he's not even a percentage worth towards DanPlan, he pretty much
also told him that he's not even viewed as an original. Dan was telling an important asset to
his company, DanPlan, who brings an enormous audience and had an immense potential regarding
his charisma, humor, that he was just a member, an employee. Dan told Stephen that implicitly
that he's a disposable unit, easily replaceable one. On the basis of these differing perspectives,
it made Daniel's comments even more insulting, even if they made sense to him at the time.
The fact that Stephen viewed shares as representative of contribution, and Daniel
telling Stephen that he was going to be receiving absolutely nothing, gave Stephen the impression
that Dan viewed his contribution as having no value whatsoever regardless of how much he was
being paid. Jay also outlines that if Stephen was there originally, Dan's reasoning that Stephen
didn't do enough meant that he wouldn't have been valued as a quote original either. Basically,
there were a plethora of excuses that Daniel could pull to make sure other associates were
locked down to the depository, but why was he locking people out? Well, the second attribute
I would use to describe Jay's perspective of Dan is nihilistic, indifferent, and that obviously
isn't going to be well received in a community with an emotionally invested audience. Jay claims
that Dan doesn't pay his animators well, often paying full-time animators around 450 Canadian
dollars a month, which is around 320 American dollars, not really sustainable for a full-time
job. It's a giant sweatshop. Originally, there were three animators when they just started off,
HOSA included, now they are at 12 without HOSA. They get paid an inconsistent $450 Canadian per
month at best, and I have seen one example of Dan actually guilt tripping and haggling animators for
their pricing. Jay does observe that there are part-time animators but claims that Daniel doesn't
really treat them differently or recognise the nuance. He also states that when surveying said
animators, a large majority, that being 8 out of 10 of them, weren't happy with the work environment.
The morale is low, there's no sense of community, the list goes on, but they say the same thing.
Dan is an insecure employer. Instead of polishing and motivating the current animator team,
all he does is just hire non-stop to replace those who leave the team. Because of this,
there is minimal difference between the full-time animators and the part-time animators. Another
issue that I found within the animation team is that they're no longer a community that they
hoped it was. Before, when it was three animators, maybe four, maybe five even, including HOSA,
they were a community, they talked to each other, they played games with each other,
they enjoyed their time with each other. Now, with 12 on the board, and I think there was more
before, that's no longer the case, they're essentially cubicle slaves. I don't see any
activity within the server, I don't see them talking to each other, and as far as you can
tell, they are just living in their own corner. In addition to this, Jay talks about the time
Daniel asked him to replace HOSA, given that HOSA is going away for a couple years.
HOSA agreed to this willingly. Basically, I was supposed to replace HOSA. HOSA has already
left Korea for his mandatory military service for the next two years. So, I decided to ask Dan
implicitly if I would get shares. The answer was no, I would get nothing. I was pretty much told
the same thing as Stephen, even though I was still technically one of the originals, I was there for
I believe the second video and onward, but I wasn't original enough for Dan.
Daniel once again presented no offer in return, before stating that he could receive an hourly
recording rate of $20, which once again, considering the money that Jay and Stephen
stipulate Daniel is making, is a rather laughable sum. How do you explain such behaviour? Well,
Jay implies really that as the owner and main benefactor of the channel, Dan recognises that
he has the power, and that as the man with the decision making power, he can make decisions that
are unfavourable to everyone else, and they will have to decide whether they like it or leave it.
Jay states that Daniel appears to treat the high turnover with a level of detachment, stating that
it's just the way it is, and that people come and go, so there's no real point in cultivating an
overly friendly environment. Dan seems to embrace the consequences, after all, if someone doesn't
like the job they're doing, they can just leave, right? That's how jobs work. But during my
investigation, he says this to me, and this is to quote Dan, people will leave eventually, no one
plans on staying at one place forever. And that was his excuse to do nothing about the animation
team, nothing else. If you want to leave, leave. I'm not telling you to stay here forever,
I'm not gonna do anything. I mean, on principle, yes, but Jay's issue extends to the fact that many
people don't have much of an option, they need to find work, and Dan plan is such an established
channel that people will work for it without question, which leads to a race to the bottom
regarding pay, and it's not that Daniel can't offer more, it's a question of whether he should,
but Dan doesn't really seem concerned with that, people come and go, and if they don't like working
for him, then they don't need to. It seems that sentiment extended to even cast members like
Steven. I warned Dan about this exact thing happening five months ago. On August 10th,
2019, after talking with Steven, Hosuh, and Dan when I was telling about the investigation,
I predicted that Steven would leave Dan plan, and due to certain promises with Dan,
I gave Dan a hypothetical. What will you do if someone leaves Dan plan? Let it be me,
Hosuh, Steven, or a group of animators, or just one single animator, what will you do? And this
was his response. To quote Dan, I don't care who leaves, this is my channel, and I will run it
based on my belief. If it sinks because of that, it sinks. That leads me to my next point, Jay's
implication that Dan is pretty arrogant. It's not just the fact that he's trying to get away with
paying people as little as possible, because he is allegedly indifferent, but he views himself as
the lifeblood of the channel. If he believes that people can come and go at any stage, then he must
believe in the power of his own talent, with or without his friends. Everyone else was disposable
but him, and if the channel went down, he went down with it. Which brings us to the next point,
determination. Dan told me that he would support me if I made my own channel, so that I can get
started there, but I wouldn't get anything from Dan plan, and that I would get referenced in his
channel. Basically publicity or exposure pay, and to quote Dan again, go make your own channel. I
will support you, give you shout outs, help you get sponsors, but you will never get a share from
Dan plan. For those who might not fully understand what Dan just said, Dan told one of his potentially
core members to go make his own company and earn money through that way, and that I would get
nothing from Dan plan, and that I won't get anything that I seemingly deserved.
Daniel had a vision of what Dan plan should be in the conflict regarding pay. Jay states that Dan
justified this by comparing it to VanossGaming, a significantly popular creator who boasts
highlights of him playing games with his friends, but Jay notes that this isn't really fair as the
creators at Vanoss all grew from the same position. For those who may not know Vanoss, he is like 10
plus, I forgot his sub count, but he is a giant in YouTube community who does a lot of collab work
with his online friends, but the difference between Vanoss and Dan plan is that when Vanoss
reached out to do collabs, they, everyone in that channel, already had their own channel,
like they, they were buddies because they were new and they worked together. What Dan was pretty
much telling us was, I know you have nothing, go make your own thing and do it that way.
Dan offered to pay Jay in various shout outs if Jay set up his own channel, but this wasn't what Jay
was interested in, and Jay found this suggestion insulting. But that was Dan's idea, he wanted his
channel, they could have theirs, his vision would not be compromised. Jay states that when he did
do some investigating into the problems of the channel, and raised the alarm, Dan told Jay to
stop interfering because Dan knew what he was doing. Maybe that was arrogance, but it's framed
as conscious enough to be assured in its final goal.
Jay- But his argument, or rebuttal for a lot of things that I said, or that I brought up, was that
he knew what he was doing. He knew what, or he was in this a lot longer and he's aware of it.
And basically he's denied or swept a lot of the crucial bits and pieces of the problem right
under. And his reply to my investigation was, to quote him, to quote Dan again,
Jay, from now on, don't ever interfere or dig around in the inner workings of the channel.
It's my channel. What he implied with that was basically, he told me to fuck off when I was
trying to help him.
Jay's perspective added a rationale behind the allegations, it gave Daniel's behaviour a sense of
logic, but not logic that was flattering in any sense at all. It frayed him as a person who was aware
of the relative power that he held, often using it to very little other than his status, using the
concept of free will to absolve wrongdoing. If you don't like it, leave, with the awareness that
really no one wanted to upset the apple cart. So now we have the stories, now we have an explanation,
however, this was just another perspective, and it wasn't Dan's. But whether Dan was innocent or not,
he was the kind of guy to reply, and oh boy, did he.
By this point, audience response was very sceptical towards Daniel. These videos painted him treating
the channel with a level of nonchalant darwinism, which harmed numerous friendships in the process.
Jay attests that he felt Dan stopped treating him as a friend and only messaged him for business purposes,
which seemingly upset him a lot.
I haven't heard Dan reach out to me just for the sake of saying hi. Whatever he did, it was always for
contact. Let me ask you guys something. Tell me a job or an occupation where you have an hourly
rate and is expected to be available upon call for your service or entertainment, with erratic
and inconsistent work hours, and that once your service and entertainment value is done, you are
shooed away, you're no longer contacted until your next service when you're next called, and you're
just an outsider even after frequent use. Because I'll tell you what I felt like when being told
like this. He was pretty much treating me like a call girl, a stripper or a hooker that he can
just call on dial on demand. It's actually really hard to damage my pride. I'm not the one to put
heavy pride value on the physical being called Jay, but kudos to Dan. He managed to piss me off to
a degree to the point of hurting my pride. These details did not merely harm Daniel's
personal image, but they compromised the whole premise of the DanPlan channel pushed by their
By The Way series, which was this bunch of friends getting along and having a good time.
DanPlan was the sort of channel where people just wanted to imagine that they were supporting good
people who were supporting each other, and that was the shock, and that's why people were upset.
Videos were uploaded, comments were left, a lot of people had a lot of strong feelings,
and yet in spite of that, a lot of these fans wanted to believe in Dan and they did not
write him off, which leads us to the 20th of January and Daniel's own response video,
and he's gone full black screen, full stop in the title, ladies and gentlemen,
we were in for a ride. Did Daniel save himself? Well, it's complicated, let me explain.
The first 23 minutes were a response to the initial video upload by Stephen,
and the next 32 were a bit of a sporadic response to Stephen's dream. Now each part has its flaws,
but not because I finished thinking it made Daniel a bad person, actually I'd argue it
humanised his perspective much more, but humanisation doesn't necessarily mean justification.
There's some good stuff here, there's some not so good stuff here, and it's not gonna break itself
down, so I suggest we dissect, while looking retrospectively at what the other videos presented
against him said and seeing how they hold up as well. I will try and get through everything,
there's gonna be a lot of discussion and a lot of opinions. Straight out the gate, if Daniel wants
some simple advice, it would be that he should have combined the receipts of the second part
with the structure of the first, it would have made it a lot more effective and impactful.
That said, it doesn't mean that we can't do that ourselves and see what it reveals.
For example, Dan tends to present the notion that Stephen had a tendency to ambush him.
He concedes that he had outbursts, even showing an apology that he sent to Stephen at the time
of the dispute, however, frames it from the perspective that Stephen had provoked him into
that reaction. On February 26th of 2019, Stephen asked if I could get on a call with him to discuss
about our VidCon and Disneyland trip, which made sense to me, so I said yes because I had to buy
him his tickets and I needed his passport information anyway, so I got on the call,
but that was not what he wanted to talk about. When I got on the call, instead of talking about
VidCon or Disneyland, him and another associate of his was on the other line. Stephen has said
that he heard from hosted that we were making more money now, so I said yes, but then Stephen
continued to say with his associate that if he doesn't get 33% of the company and the revenue,
that he is going to leave the channel. At the time, I felt betrayed that he held no remorse
of leaving, that he had no sympathy for our hard work, and that he suddenly changed his mind about
everything that he used to say about YouTube, now that we're making more money. Obviously, I was happy
to give him more money. We were making more money, so to pay him for his talents is fine, but I was
angry at his approach, so we fought. We didn't fight for one hour, we didn't fight for a day, we fought
for a couple of days. It was back and forth, and we have said a lot of things to each other, which
I apologized immediately after I got off the phone, and it wasn't pretty. I don't remember a lot of
things we said to each other, because it was 11 months ago, but the emotions are all still here.
In a way, this makes sense. Receipts back up that Stephen had baited Dan into a call. In a way,
it makes sense that he may have made some cruel comments in the heat of the moment. He doesn't seem
like an inherently cruel person, and even in the stream, Stephen made one comment that always stuck
to me. And I'm often less critical of streams, because they're not scripted, they're not organized,
you have to take what people say in the moment with a pinch of salt, but the structure of this comment
always said to me that he acknowledged that Dan may have been behaving irrationally at that point,
regardless of the fact that he said it, and Daniel admits it, it makes sense that maybe he'd be angry
at that point. This doesn't make the comment right, but with this situation, it adds up. I can see why
that would upset Stephen, and I'm not invalidating that, but Dan justifies why he would be upset too.
We say cruel things sometimes. However, for a moment, we need to remember that this dispute
didn't start in the call. The dispute started before the call, because there is a fundamental
difference in how these two people view contribution, and that disagreement is once again put
under the microscope in Dan's video. And in these parts, he can come across as a bit elitist.
For the rest of that summer, we put all our time and effort into making more videos,
in running the channel. Hosuh was drawing animations, I was writing scripts, I was editing,
and just overall just, you know, running the channel as a channel. It was a good time.
Stephen was just still coming on occasionally, recording, and then leaving for weeks or months at
a time while we did it, but that was okay too. He said he's doing this for fun, he's just doing this
a hobby, he didn't see it as a career, and we were all okay with that. As the channel grew, we started
making revenue, actual money. It was insane, and when it happened, it happened suddenly, and it was
something we never really expected. When we started to make money, I told Stephen that we
want to pay him. He declined, but I insisted that he at least take something for his time of
recording with us, so we mutually decided to pay him $25 an hour for his recording times. This is
where the $225 came into play, from September 22nd of 2018 to February 22nd of 2019. Of that six months,
he worked a total of nine hours, which was fine. I thought that was compensating something for his
time. He was having fun with his friends and getting some cash out of it. I didn't care if he
didn't work a lot, he wasn't taking YouTube seriously. And of course, I wanted to compensate him more,
so I was going to take him to Disneyland and VidCon, all expenses paid. We would have a lot of fun.
The fact that he valued his 30 to 40 minutes of recording, the same with the amount of sacrifice
and effort the whole set I put onto the channel was insulting, and it made me angry.
Now in principle, I can understand why Daniel would clearly view this input as somewhat limited,
and not to the degree that he has committed. But everyone who's involved with YouTube knows that
firstly, a creative job extends beyond recording, and in Stephen's video, he vocally calls attention
to the characters that he fleshed out, and the effort that he put in. He may have recorded for
a certain amount of time, but the impact and the thought of these characters exist beyond that.
Informal Mafia Stephen, Huggy Zombie Apocalypse Stephen,
Mahosa Stephen. Daniel didn't give me a script to do those characters, I made them up,
and I made my personalities enjoyable. But to Daniel, every recording session, I was merely
talking to friends. To him, I wasn't putting in any effort into the videos.
On top of this, it's important to remember, it's not just about the amount of work one does,
but their contribution to the branding and image of the channel. If your face is on the merch,
if you're advertised besides the brands, if people come for your quotes in the videos,
that's prospective income based on viewership and support. It doesn't matter if that character was
fostered in 5 minutes or 5 years, because a majority of financial income for these sorts
of channels will come from the audience connection with the character. A characterisation that brings
people entertainment or hope, or anything of the sorts is not something you can base
solely on the work behind the scenes, even if it is significantly more difficult than the work
in front of the camera or the microphone. The first abject disagreement we encounter
though is regarding negotiation details. Stephen states that in the call he requested a 20%
share of income, which is corroborated by Jay. Daniel frames it much more harshly,
stating that Stephen demanded a third of the income share, or else he was going to walk.
Stephen continued to say with his associate that if he doesn't get 33% of the company
and the revenue that he is going to leave the channel.
Now this point was anticipated in Jay's video, that clip I told you to keep in mind.
Some people have used this as a means to invalidate Daniel's point, but anticipating what some will
say does not necessarily mean it's invalid unless you have solid evidence for that assertion,
and all Jay stated was that Dan may be confused as someone else proposed it. Now this may be the
mysterious figure that Daniel alluded to, however there is very little detail regarding the identity
of this additional person, other than they would need to have been physically with Stephen at that
point, as we can see the 7 minute call was between two users. Due to Stephen's streaming comments,
some people have said it was Hosuh, but I think in Stephen's video and streams,
he was implying that Hosuh had been negotiating following the call rather than in the call.
And I made Hosuh get involved as well. Hosuh, I really am sorry that I made you get involved
in my fight, but I'm also really grateful that you did. What I do find strange is following these
aggressive negotiations, that they then settled on a still rather underwhelming $100 per video
Stephen, which if you consider the alleged income of the channel is still less than 1%.
I insisted that he at least take something for his time of recording with us, so we mutually
decided to pay him $25 an hour for his recording times.
Daniel signals that he insisted Stephen took 25 per hour of recording prior to these negotiations,
despite Stephen's apparent refusal at the time, and uses it like he's a generous guy,
but then decides not to insist Stephen have any more after his apparent aggressive
dissatisfaction. It doesn't add up here, and that's not the only thing.
After the March incident, we renegotiated my salary, or rather the amount of pay I was getting.
And I remember him saying, what do you want to get paid now? I said $100, $100 per video.
I didn't say that, but he offered it, and I was like, okay, fine, whatever.
And then afterwards, he said, okay, I hope you know that $100 is a lot of money.
He says that I made him take the $100 per video, and that I guilt-tripped him into taking it,
and I forced him to take it. These are untrue. At the end of our fight, when he decided to stay,
he then told me that he wants $100 per video. He could have said more.
I would have not mined that. That wasn't the point of the fight. That was not the point of the
argument.
When I say I find these details strange, I don't mean I find them strange in the sense that they
incriminate Daniel, but it equally doesn't make me think that this is a one-sided affair, or that
he's blasted these allegations away. Unless Stephen planned out how to throw the channel
under the bus in a dramatic way ten months in advance, which there is no evidence of,
I have trouble seeing this specific argument as anything else than a couple guys with vastly
different perspectives clashing furiously over them, realising that it wasn't getting them
anywhere, and coming to some sort of reconciliation with the expectation that, for both of their sides,
it could improve. But it wasn't a real reconciliation, because the initial problem
that provoked it was still there. Both sides are just full of interpretations that view the other
perspective in unequivocally bad faith. Stephen says that Dan claiming something's a lot of money
was manipulation, when he might just be a stingy person. Dan states that Stephen was claiming that
Daniel tricked him into taking less money, but Stephen never claimed that because he notes that
they'd already agreed on a figure. As for who proposed it, who knows, as most of the fans
recognised it was like watching an embarrassing divorce. Daniel's video can be equally as cynical
as Stephen's, they have highly cynical perspectives on each other's actions. For example, Stephen
viewed his request of asking what more he can do as a genuine plea to try and earn his place on the
channel and a greater share of the business, and Dan's perspective didn't connect with me at all
about this. But when he saw that his initial strategy wasn't working, during our argument,
he switched and said, what can I do to get more percentage? At that point, I realised that
appreciation or more involvement wasn't what he was looking for, but more profit. That's why we
fought. Like you say you considered him a friend at all points, and then say something like that.
Like you acknowledge it was a heat of the moment argument, but then make a point which would
question his intent regardless in that moment. And it's not like I think Dan is at liberty to
give anyone any more of a management role in his channel. From the perspective of management,
if that's what he wants to retain, then that is fair. Dan wanted control of the channel,
I don't think he's completely arrogant as other videos have portrayed, but I do think he likes
to do things his way, and he didn't want interference, he wants to be the director,
and that's okay. But I think Stephen genuinely wanted to justify and solidify his role,
but I don't think Dan had anything to offer. I don't know if Dan's trying to completely
shield his image, but an explanation like this would make much more sense than the
clumsy account that he provided. I think the main problem here was that there was no real
way to justify that someone's character was worth less than 1% of the channel's worth,
and by not offering even a share of that, it clearly left a bad taste in Stephen's mouth.
In his original video, Stephen states that he asked a very specific question twice,
asking how much his worth is.
And although he left details out of Dan's reply in the DMs, the political, vague nature
is highly unsatisfying. Simple as Stephen wanted to know his worth, but I don't think Dan either
knew or wanted to think about it. This is also why he probably offered to help Stephen in the
creation of his own channel, this sentiment was echoed in Jay's video, and although Dan didn't
get the chance to respond to that one, it was a similar message, he wanted to help grow his
friends' own channels, and shout them out, even mentioning VanossGaming.
I suggested an idea to Stephen, that we make him a channel, a channel of his own, a company
that he can run. I did this for a couple of main reasons. One, so that he can have the freedom
to create, and the business decisions that he wants to make is his own. Two, I wanted him to
learn how much effort, and time, and sacrifice it takes to run a channel. And lastly, I wanted us to
have a partnership. Once I realized he wanted to take YouTube seriously, I wanted him to make a
channel of his own, where we would promote it, where we would try to help it grow, where I would
give him and suggest things that help a channel to grow faster, and hopefully develop a relationship
like, you know, the VanossGaming group, or the David Dobrik group, but he declined.
Once again, it just seems like a fundamental disagreement of how they wanted to operate.
Not everyone wants their own channel, and it's a very strange philosophy that Daniel has, though I
think he genuinely believes it. He wants you to understand the sacrifice. It's daft. And of course,
Stephen would have been able to understand the work if Daniel had given him a way to earn his share,
but Daniel didn't value his intent at that point. If you didn't want someone to expect more from
a channel that their face is featured on, you shouldn't have let them on the channel.
On top of this, the character dynamic in gaming videos like Vanoss is so unbelievably different
to the BTW series that there's no real way to draw a parallel which justifies that point of view.
I would argue that with gaming channels, there are many more other in-game factors that can
influence the entertainment value of the content and its marketability, and although there are
other elements to consider with Dan Plan's animated content too, the interplay between
the cast is such a significant selling point, it's not the same. I do wonder if Daniel had a
legitimate nostalgia for his gaming days and the creative control that it gave him.
In spite of all these points, the way situation does go both ways. Dan stated that it was Stephen
who offered the $100 rate that they switched to, so the responsibility of that fact has to
partly lie on him, providing it's true. But Stephen's point after this argument wasn't that
he wasn't satisfied with the money, but that no matter how hard he tried, he wasn't recognised,
he didn't feel like he was a friend, he wanted to be noticed by Dan, he wanted to be credited by Dan,
and he wasn't. He portrays himself as not being obsessed with the money,
in fact, rather claiming Dan was.
And when Stephen quit Dan Plan,
he's told me that he still wants to be paid for all the videos that will be posted in the future,
which I said I would honour, but then on the livestream he goes on to say
which contradicts what he texted me.
But this is one of the weaker rebuttals again, you don't have to care specifically about the
money to still want it for the work you've done, because it could be about what the money
represents, a recognition of one's work that they've put in. I don't care about sponsor money
that much, but when I do the sponsor, I still expect the payments, for my own personal pride,
to know that I'm worth it. If he really cared about the money, I find it unlikely that he would
have settled for such a proportionally low amount given how much the audience valued him,
regardless of Dan's perspective. It's very easy to blow up this drama, and it did blow up,
and everyone piled on, but you can't lose sight of what inspired it, the fact that a person just
didn't feel like he was part of a family that the audience perceived as existing. That's what you
had to combat, and in a way Dan did combat that, but he kind of misses the point again.
If I really thought of him nothing more than an employee, I would have never taken him to
VidCon or Disneyland. If I was not friends with him, I wouldn't be friends with him.
If I thought that I didn't think of him as a friend, I wouldn't invite him to go camping
with me. I wouldn't introduce him to my girlfriend or my family. I wouldn't take him to camping.
I wouldn't try to go watch movies with him. I wouldn't invite him to the parties I would
only invite my friends over to. There are no real receipts provided for this,
I'll provide benefit of the doubt that they probably happened, because it doesn't change
the point. The point was that whatever happened outside of YouTube, it was an insult to Stephen
Howe he was treated on the channel. He felt like an employee, he felt perceived as one,
and I believe that. I struggle to imagine doing a collaborative channel with a legitimate friend
and not having a shares-based agreement, but simply put, I don't think Daniel viewed it as
collaborative. I think that no matter what happened in their discussion, no matter how
angry they got, the fact that they never came to the agreement that there was a way to share income
was the most indicative factor in the failure of their friendship, because a share is not just
worth, it is trust, and there was no trust here. It's claimed that Daniel doesn't even share income
details with Hosuh, but that is not mentioned. Dan references the trips to Disneyland and VidCon,
but Stephen himself, in the stream that Dan responded to, said that he felt the intent
wasn't there. When we went to Disneyland is pretty much when I thought it was getting better.
But then I saw Daniel pull out a camera.
And then I knew for a fact that he just wanted me to dance. So I danced.
And then I knew for a fact that things weren't going to get better.
In the Disneyland video itself, uploaded to DanPlan, Stephen makes a pretty snide quip
that was left in. That aside, because Dan was quite possessive regarding what he viewed as
his own channel, Stephen interpreted it as a sense of worth, and greater, trust. Maybe it was to an
extent, I don't know, but I don't think it was necessarily malice on Dan's behalf, I think it
was ignorance. And I think that ignorance was willful to an extent. I forgot to mention at
the end of the video because I got a little emotional, but for transparency sake, I want
to say that I have heard whispers of Stephen planning to do something along the lines of
making a video after he left, so it wasn't a hundred percent surprise when it happened.
Nevertheless, the content was still upsetting, and that's why it was still very shocking.
I wanted to end the video there, I didn't want to say anything more, that was just my side of the story.
I don't think Dan was that shocked. I think the strains must have been clear, and Dan didn't do
enough to avert it because he probably never considered the consequences, and when he did,
it was probably too late. But that's not necessarily a one-way street.
A lot of public drama on this scale happens because one party decides that actually, they don't want to
talk it out privately, they want to go nuclear, they want to call someone else. Now, Stephen's
video isn't your typical call-out post, it doesn't seem tailor-made to be a channel-ending video,
but I think its impact spoke volumes to how people viewed him as a part of the channel. However, with
the whole future of the channel in jeopardy, was it worth it, and was it the right thing to do?
In Daniel's response video, he posts various conversations between himself and Stephen.
The relevant conversation showed the aftermath of Stephen's private departure from the channel.
Daniel is very attentive after Stephen lists out his personal issues, suggesting twice that they
meet up, which is something that Daniel himself references in his response video.
So first things first, before he released that video, I already wanted to talk to him in person,
in regards to him leaving, I asked him once after he left to meet up, he said he wanted to do an
a call but we never got in a call, and then later he texted me again and I said, let's please meet
up, let's have some coffee, but he declined again. Daniel knew there was an issue, he wanted to resolve
it privately, however, sometimes things shouldn't just be talked about privately, sometimes we do
need to go public with our grievances to make sure that a person is held to account. There are plenty
of situations where such a promotion can help other people come forward with their own problems,
and plenty of times a private conversation with a coercive person can help suppress possible
consequences facing down a person, and postpone the ultimate confrontation, and maybe make this
person's abuse of power even worse. Sometimes it can be an intimidation tactic, but it's hard to tell
with a lot of people, was going public relevant here, especially in the way that Stephen did?
Let's talk about it. Well, firstly, I think what we have to discuss is why on earth Stephen
decided not to talk it out in private, in fact, why he never indicated at all that he planned to
make a video, while still talking to Dan at that time. To many people, such behaviour would seem
pretty sneaky, and to be honest, they're not inherently wrong. If we discount the idea that he
had malintent, why would he do this? I think the one quote that explains it is here.
So, do I think there was any way to avoid the situation? No. A heavy hand is only moved by a heavier
hand. He viewed it as imperative that he do this, but many would argue going off Stephen and Daniel's
videos that this conflict was clearly avoidable. However, in the streams there are some details
which I found quite important, such as this. After our fight, Hosuh was still talking to Dan about
getting money out to other people, to the animators, to me, to everyone else, but Daniel was so stubborn
and he thinks that his wages are okay. They clearly aren't. I will get into the wage issue
after, but it was just not, and Hosuh and me were not passive in this.
Now, Daniel doesn't respond to every stream point, and he doesn't have to, but I am surprised he
didn't respond to this one, as to me, it's an important detail that could decide whether a
situation is avoidable or not. Also, I want to briefly mention about Hosuh, because Stephen
talks about Hosuh. Due to the possible legal implications that may come out affecting Hosuh
negatively, I'm not going to talk about the transactions and terms we have come to an
agreement to. It's something that we both have come to an agreement with. That's all I will say.
Him and I are still good business-wise. It's something that had to happen, and it's something
that really can't be talked about online. It's a private matter, and that's it.
He cites legal ramifications in declining to talk about certain details regarding Pay and Hosuh,
but I don't think the idea that Hosuh was negotiating on behalf of his friends would fall
under that. Now, for argument's sake, I'm going to assume that Stephen's perspective is the case,
and that Hosuh was indeed attempting to negotiate with Dan, and that Dan rebuffed these negotiations
and showed no intention to alter Pay. Essentially, at the end of these failed negotiations,
Stephen receives the impression that there is nothing he can say or do to receive a little more
respect. Hosuh was fighting for more Pay, that did not occur. They exhausted every option privately.
So that's the first half of whether a situation is worth going public about, but what about the
second? Well, I think this is the key one, and it may explain why he lied about jumping into a call
regarding Disneyland, and why he didn't bring anything up prior to the video, and that is
manipulation.
Stephen clearly had the expectation that if he had brought it up with Dan, Dan would be able to
talk Stephen out of it. This is a problem of perspective, because in Dan's mind, he would have
had the opportunity to persuade Stephen with his numerous facts and logic, and in Stephen's mind,
Dan would manipulate him into a position where he doesn't speak up and his story isn't told.
Which perspective is true? Well, it really depends on what happened specifically behind the scenes,
details that haven't really been admitted or conceded by either side. Stephen speculated,
and Daniel dodged, neither of which are conclusive. I guess it made sense in Stephen's
head what he was doing, and like Daniel, he probably didn't consider all the consequences of
not confronting it and diving head first in the video, and it's hard to say that what's happened
to Daniel specifically and DanPlan is completely justified.
After Daniel posts his video, I want to sit down with him and actually talk things out.
I do truly want to resolve this, because there are still people working on DanPlan
who are being mistreated, and I don't want that to happen to them.
So yeah, I want to resolve this. Not for my sake, because I honestly don't want his money anymore.
He does seem quite torn on his own feelings regarding Daniel,
and he may well have been questioning whether he did the right thing. It's a good question.
Was undermining the image of a friend and his channel once to even help build a justified
response to the perception of an injustice perpetrated by a colleague, one that did not
seem like it was going to resolve itself otherwise? Maybe not, but what would the middle
ground have been? I think that's the question for discussion today. It's just a shame that Stephen
did have such a cynical perception of Dan, to believe that every message with a smiley face,
every trip posted onto YouTube had some ulterior motive. This wasn't helped when Jay said in his
video that he felt like Dan only messaged him when he had something to gain. It brings into
question all the niceties. Being nice doesn't make you a good person, and some people can be awfully
friendly while twisting the knife in other aspects. And that's how Stephen saw Daniel,
a shining smile with teeth of daggers, and Stephen decided to take it down. By doing this,
Stephen also broke a prospective agreement that he made with Dan, which was to wait out his position
until Hosuh had left the channel. This was detailed in Daniel's video again.
Nevertheless, I still compensate Stephen for each video that he's in. And that was the agreement
that we made. My side of the agreement was that we try and get past this. And on top of that,
that because Hosuh is leaving for military and we both knew at the time, I wanted the channel and
the community to be still the same when he came back. So I wanted Stephen to stay at least until
then and we can figure something out from there on. Even the day when he left the channel,
December 15th or 16th, I supported him. I told him that it was upsetting that he was leaving
and that even though he is breaking his end of the deal, I won't break my end of the deal.
And that I want us to transition through this smoothly and I want him to succeed in his own
pursuits and in his chapter and in his channel. Now I must say I find it strange that moving past
an argument would be included in a deal. Feelings like that cannot really be defined by the fabric
of such. I feel that Dan wanted to move on so badly and he just didn't know what else to do but
put it in a pact. I can understand why Stephen not following through on this may be cause for critique,
however, more on the side that he made the deal in the first place after such a volatile argument,
one that both sides frame as extremely involved. Now, I would also add that in the DM shown by
Daniel himself, Stephen seems to contest that this deal was ever made, which gives me the impression
that it wasn't particularly formal, but let's entertain the idea that this deal is a thing for
argument's sake. Binding deals are a bad idea unless you both have a similar level of influence
in that deal, or else one's always going to feel at risk of being taken advantage of. Now, you
might make a deal like that as a friend, but as Stephen no longer viewed Dan as a friend when he
broke the deal, he therefore had no reason to commit to it. Deals like those are to be made
between equals, and Stephen no longer felt like an equal, so he had no reason to honour it.
Why he made the deal in the first place, I don't know, maybe he felt bad, maybe it was for Hosuh,
they clearly have a close bond, but whatever it was, it was buried six feet deep by January.
And even during the first video, which was carefully written and planned and edited,
he doesn't mention anything about not attacking me, but then posts a community tab later saying,
oh yeah, don't attack Daniel. Consequences were more severe than most would have anticipated,
and his mixed feelings did lead to him often swinging back and forth about how he feels
regarding the outcome. Daniel picks these out and criticises him quite harshly.
He mentions at the beginning of his live stream, don't attack Dan. I appreciate that,
I honestly do, but the statement that he makes isn't consistent with what he goes on to say,
where he says he's using you guys as a weapon, even though he doesn't want to.
Because Dan didn't give me recognition for one mil, so I'm going to take away his two mil,
and I find that pretty hilarious. Of course, I am using you guys as a weapon then, so if you want
to unsubscribe, by all means, go ahead. If you want to keep being subscribed, by all means, go ahead.
Or to unsubscribe, if they feel like it.
However, Daniel's clip of the stream does omit Stephen's then sudden pivot back to
reasonability and recognition that this would be a bad idea.
If you want to unsubscribe, by all means, go ahead. If you want to keep being subscribed,
by all means, go ahead. I don't want to use you guys as a weapon, that's so cowardly on my part.
So I would never say do or don't, do something.
As said, streaming brings out a spontaneity of people that can be fundamentally emotional
and bitter, and this is clearly an emotional topic. You have to take that into consideration
when making your arguments, but unfortunately, both of these people
didn't see the intent in the other side. This was a personal battle that Stephen fought,
but by the stream and Jay's video, it became a greater question about another oppressed minority,
and I'm not talking about gamers. Who was it then?
To an extent, both parties could have been more proactive, but as the guy in charge of the channel,
Daniel did make a real mistake by treating someone who is part of the brand as a part-time rep,
financially or personally.
Now this doesn't mean I'm not frugal, I grew up poor, I am a cheap person just because of the way
I was raised, I am not insensitive to finances just because I'm now dealing with a larger sum
of money. Each transaction I'm very careful with, and I am very cautious in making those transactions.
Now in his response video, Daniel does admit he has a tendency to be cheap, and I think that's fine.
It's good that he's being open about it, some openness will hopefully have improvement in the future,
however, he does dedicate a significant proportion of the video to the animators.
The animators and just crew in general, I feel super bad for dragging them into this,
because in my head, one of the scenarios that could play out is literally him just burning
the entire channel to the ground, letting it die, and then leaving all the animators and crew in
general to do nothing, because this is a job for them. First and foremost, I've already apologized
to them privately, but I want to apologize again. I am sorry that all of you are caught up in this.
It's not your problem that Stephen and I had a spat, and it's not your problem that we are
taking this out in publicly. You should not be involved in this. I know it's not just stress for
me, but for you all as well, and I am so so so sorry that you're involved in this. Now the animators
are a pretty sacred talking point, they're this mystical third party who neither side can
necessarily lay claim to, so each faction definitely panders to the narrative that works
best for them, while leaving out a few relevant details. Now, animators are not at the forefront
of the channel, but they do provide a significant contribution, and it is accepted that they would
be paid for such a contribution. After Stephen's video, there were rumblings about the status of
animators, and if they'd experienced a similar side of Daniel's behaviour, be that his treatment
of them, or his payment. The more I dove into it, the more I realized how many more people were
being screwed. This is not just a me problem anymore. When I started digging, I started asking
the animators, how much were you getting paid? And the answers kept being the same, about $450
per month. For a month of work, they get $450, and it's not even consistent, because sometimes
it takes more than a month to make a video, but you still get $450. $450, let's say $450,
just to be generous, for a month's work. That is insane. If my boss was paying me $450 for working
full-time, I'd quit the job. The word full-time was thrown around a lot. Part-time was mentioned
too, but the main allegations came from how he treated his quote, full-time animators.
What it means to work for a company full-time, is that you are implying that I will work for you
for this amount of set of hours, consistently, and I am trusting this company to give me financial
stability of my work. So basically, I will ensure that I give you my full-time of work,
and in return, I want a consistent, safe, monetary, like, reciprocation. I give you work,
you give me money. That is not the case. There is very, very, very little difference between
part-time animators and full-time animators. The full-time maybe get paid a little bit more,
who knows, but as far as I can tell, it's still inconsistent, it's still grossly underpaid,
and there's almost no benefits. Daniel has essentially trapped any animator
who actually wants to make a living just by paying them like slave wages,
while still making them work full-time. Now full-time is quite a loaded word in western
society. It generally refers to a person who works a set amount of hours and obtains their
primary source of income from that job. The figure that was also thrown around was $450 a
month, although they state that payment was inconsistent as a ballpark figure for a full-time
job. Anyone will tell you that is unacceptable, and if Dan Plan was doing that, then he should
be called out. However, he contests this immediately, and shows receipts to back it up.
I don't make them sign anything, and if I were to have hired them full-time to make them sign
something where they can't get out and then not pay them properly, that's illegal.
First of all, they don't sign anything. It's a verbal agreement, and it's second of all,
not a full-time employment. No one has mentioned this, and I don't know why. They are what is
called subcontractors. They are contractors. That is what the type of job that they have.
They do a contracted job for a project. In this case, it's a video, and it's completely different
from a wage-based job. They do their own work as their own entity, and on the project that we
request, we both agree on a price. When we mutually agree on the price, they then work on the video
itself. People keep on bringing up full-time or part-time or whatever. It just doesn't make any
sense, and that is not the type of agreement that I have with the animators. If I were to hire
somebody in a different manner, that would be a different story, but this isn't that case. When
I interview them, I always ask how much they want to be paid per video, and Stephen says that they
come into this job without knowing anything. Now, subcontractual work is completely different,
because you're paying for the completion of a job. You don't know how many hours they're working or
how consistently they're working. You have a job, you have a deadline, and you hope it's done in
time. I must admit, I find it strange that as a person providing a recurrent job on a regular
basis, he doesn't have a set price in his head, and asks animators what they want to be paid.
Daniel is an established creator with a lot of influence, and an animator who will want to be
hired for future jobs may lure their prices for competitiveness. If it was a one-off job,
or a field that he was inexperienced in, it would make more sense.
And I thought that if they weren't happy with it, they could always talk to me, because I was
approachable to them. It doesn't excuse the fact that I am in the position that I'm in,
which means that since I am the boss or a YouTuber, that because of who I am,
and the relationship that I have with them, and the business point of view, that it is
harder to approach me, no matter what I do. And if that is what the audience felt,
and if that's what the animators felt, I sincerely apologize. I am sorry.
Now, Dan does admit that he made a mistake by not being more proactive in the video,
I do appreciate that, and there are many subcontractors who do have their own pre-established
prices, however, it's hard to apply that without a clear amount of work for a video established.
Nonetheless, it is just a side point, and I will digress. Does this mean he was paying good price?
Not really. I'm not an animator myself, I did briefly speak to an animator involved who felt
that given the work per frame and the consideration that the animator storyboarded
the videos to, this payment was not sufficient in comparison to the other work they have been doing
since DanPlan. It also depends on the amount of negotiation that occurred prior, and as went over
earlier, we're not really receiving a clear narrative on that front. On top of this, in Jay's
video, he also references Hosuh, who is an animator himself, and his opinion on how much the animators
should be paid.
Hosuh- This is coming from Hosuh directly. In Hosuh's opinion, the videos created by the animators
are worth at least $1500 Canadian per video.
Now, this is not coming from Hosuh directly, but Hosuh hasn't challenged it either,
and has since worked with Jay. That doesn't exactly prove he said it, but it's another relevant nugget
of information to consider regardless. Unfortunately, in this situation, the receipts were rather low.
Some question whether the animators could have gone on strike, but unfortunately, if they viewed
their roles expendable given the high turnover of staff, then Dan could have just sacked them.
If they weren't really that much of a community, then it would have been even harder to organise.
Of course, this begs the question of why this was not raised more when Hosuh was supposedly
negotiating or Jay investigating. Well, probably because no party wanted to initiate civil war with
the hope that it would improve, but problems seldom disappear without confrontation, or else
the person would be ignorant, and although I think Dan was willfully ignorant to an extent,
I think the animator issue here was probably a collateral outcome of the drama which could have
been avoided in hindsight. There are also claims after Daniel's video that he had cherry picked
examples that supported his case, and this may be somewhat true, but unfortunately, there's not
too much that can be done at this point, you'd need evidence of the contrary, simple ads.
It's not fair to the animators that are coming on with zero knowledge and essentially being put
into an assembly line factory. Again, how would he know he hasn't joined in a single interview?
What I do during the interview Steven has never been part of, so for him to just assume that they
don't know anything when they come in is a lie. I explain in full detail what they will be doing.
I tell them that this isn't an easy job. I tell them that it may take a long time.
I tell them that the type of employment is a subcontractor work, which means I pay them
poor for the video, not for the amount of time. Contractor job is a real thing,
and anyone that knows business would know what I'm talking about. I obviously don't know a lot of
different size of different businesses, but it's one of the things that you're allowed to do
when you want to hire somebody for a job. Now the pay also depends on the length of the video,
the amount of videos that we have some contracted out to, and the quality of the project,
because afterwards I try to tip them more than what we pre-agreed on. If they weren't happy with
the pay, they can talk to me. Because there has been times where, you know, we would discuss
me and an animator, hey, do you think this is good enough? And they tell me, I don't know,
do you think it's good enough? And we come to an agreement, and if they aren't happy with it,
we can meet somewhere in the middle. Although Daniel claimed that there was no way that Steven
would know such details listed in the live stream as incriminating, as we know, Jay on the other
hand claimed to have sat in interviews regarding prospective animators with Dan, and made some
pretty strong claims himself, likely the ones that may have been repeated in Steven's streams.
Steven's comments are likely a case of fired up individuals and Chinese whispers. I think it
probably is an exaggerated image, but that's what happens when you try and tackle a subject that
you feel strongly about on stream based on other people's comments. Again, I can't show texts or
messages, but trust me when I say that I have tried always my best to be considerate to the
animators. I've always tried to be kind and gentle and compassionate about their personal lives,
and not only that, but be understanding if they're delayed. Doesn't mean I was never
frustrated. Anyone who works with anyone are sometimes frustrated, but I tried my best to
care for them first before I care about this business or posting a video. When I ask them
and they ignore me, I even continue to say and worry about their well-being before the video
itself. I ask them how they're doing first before I continue and ask about how the videos are coming
along. The only time I would have a conversation about if they're too delayed or if there's
something wrong is if there is something seriously wrong or they're months and months late and I have
to have a conversation just to see if everything's okay. And even then it's not an aggressive call,
I just ask how they're doing and that I understand that personal lives do interfere
with finishing on deadlines. This is not because I'm like a great person, it's because I just
know what it's like to be on the other side of a relationship when it comes to like a boss figure,
I guess, and I didn't want to be one of those people that yelled or intimidated their co-workers
or the people they worked with. I at least think, to the best of my knowledge,
try to be kind and gentle with the animators. There are two dramatically different perspectives
here, but they're not completely incompatible, although they are somewhat. Dan may have been a
lovely person to talk to, may have checked in with people about how they were doing, may have
been accepting when they were late. That doesn't mean he pays them well, nor does it mean they
weren't afraid to speak out due to the possibility of their pay being affected. Admittedly, now the
channel has been declared deceased by various people, there isn't really much at stake, so
that point is kinda moot. But for the animators who did speak up, what did they actually say?
Well, once again, it becomes quite complicated. There was a YouTuber named Snazzle who was quite
a vocal critic of Daniel, calling him out left, right and centre for his behaviour.
What are you doing, Dan? What are you doing, man? This is disgusting. Please, please come out and
say something. Please apologise. Please let people know you can change at least a little, please.
There has to be some humanity in you. This can't happen. You have to see now that this is wrong.
There has to be some fundamental click going on in your mind that says, hey, this is wrong.
I'm doing something wrong. Everyone's telling me I'm doing something wrong, but I'm not seeing it.
Why am I not seeing it? Why can't I not see it? Where is that at, Dan? Where's the click? I don't
get it from you. None of this makes any sense. How could you be at this right now? How could this
level of incompetency happen? How could you be so impudent as to not pay for your staff to get what
they need? Those people care so much about your channel, obviously more than you do, and you take
all the credit, all the money. That is insane. After Steven streamed and Jay spoke about this
narrative, the animator point became more prominent, and Snazzle became more involved.
He posted this on Discord, claiming to have spoken to the animators, and it had moved him to the
point of tears. Sobering stuff. So what did he do? Well, Snazzle conducted a charity livestream,
raising over $4,000 for these animators. A couple of these animators were involved themselves,
though I don't think they spoke about the specific drama. I feel if they did,
the clips would have been used elsewhere, even though the stream is no longer accessible.
Regardless, this was an extraordinary success for the animators and their advocates, but there was
more to come. And when I say that, I mean, well, Daniel's video. Dan obviously disputed these claims,
showed corresponding evidence, and although he didn't directly respond to the claims made by
Snazzle and Jay, his story generally contradicted the image that his treatment of the animators
would bring a tear to one's eye. So some became quite confused, and asked questions about the
original claims against Daniel. What were the responses? Well...
Daniel- As much as I want to explain the situation to people, as much as I know how much, you know,
how much people want the information, the information that I have, I just can't do it.
I can't sit here and justify giving out that when I know how many people will be hurt,
just because I do that.
This was frustrating, and it left a lot of people with unanswered questions.
Dan's response wasn't the best. There were clear logical flaws, statements that conveyed a rather
self-righteous sentiment, arguments that were too irrelevant, and details left out. But after the
video, there were very few responses too, and those that were uploaded were very inconclusive.
Lest it be reminded, Dan was the only person to provide actual evidence, and that evidence
may not have definitively disproved all the narratives against him, but it was enough in
certain terms.
After some ran such a strong narrative on the basis of the animators, and raising thousands
of dollars for them, people wanted to feel like this narrative was actually justified,
and the fact that people decided to hold back was understandably frustrating.
Some people compared this response to Jeffree Star, and I understand why. It was the sudden
decision to end the drama immediately after a conflicting viewpoint and evidence came out,
and framing it as the right thing to do. People never liked that, it seems disingenuous. They
also don't like being told when it's time to stop the discussion, they'll decide when to stop being
interested in it, thank you very much. Snazzle did state he was doing it for the animators,
and I do not doubt that many of them probably did want the drama to end, but it's likely worth
considering that a bit earlier on in the situation when you're dogmatically preaching over your
microphone. I also don't want to dispute that there's a real moralistic case for the disclosure
of more information, and justification of the money raised off people who assume the premise
to be true, and the handling is definitely subpar, but it is what it is. They raised a lot of money
following the end of By The Way, and they did say they would be working with the animators to find
them new work, not that the animators need that. However, I'd be lying if I said the situation
didn't leave a bitter taste in my mouth given the strength and passion prior, I just hope some
people take it as a learning experience going forward.
Daniel has essentially trapped any animator who actually wants to make a living just by paying them like slave wages,
while still making them work full time.
If this was true, I need to be sued. This is not true, and the fact that he said this
is a defamation towards not just me, but the company.
Now, Daniel does sound a bit silly when he talks about defamation against the company,
but equally, these strong sentiments are why people have probably interpreted it with a bit
more of an open mind. If Daniel was straight up lying about details, it seems possible to
audience members that someone probably would have at least provided factual evidence to the
contrary. Now, you can 100% believe the idea that there may be some reasons that these people don't
want the drama. These people are not the same as Jeffree Star, and the likes who thrive off it.
In the words of Steven,
Do I plan on posting another reply video afterwards? No. Once I know that Daniel has seen
my stuff, I want to talk to him privately. We're not going to do that, like, avocado person.
What do I think? I think it's fair to say the main individuals involved probably didn't want
this huge conflict. Steven wanted to be recognised, and Daniel had a reason to reply. Both felt
inclined to make public statements for what they believe was just, and although, as noted,
certain comments were probably overkill, it's what cynicism does to people. What about other
people's motives? Well, I'm not so sure. Jay was another character who had a right to comment in
what definitely formed a case against Daniel, and the animator issue was one of the blind spots
where Daniel didn't provide any screenshots other than regarding pay. As I noted earlier,
the fact that he had no DMs to show whatsoever was pretty unconvincing. On top of this,
Jay claimed he had DMs of his own to release, as he felt his credibility was challenged.
Again, these DMs never saw the light of day, whether the animators urged him not to as he
says in DMs, or if the DMs never existed, is something you'll have to decide for both sides.
I personally feel that, because it was the case for both sides, probably meant there was an
element of animator reservation, and sometimes silence can be equally as telling as speaking up.
People were probably conflicted about their feelings regarding Daniel. Was he nice for the
right reasons, or was he just massaging the product? Was he intimidating, or were they
intimidated? I doubt you'd see Dan going around spontaneously abusing people, so I assume the
evidence was a bit more subtle, and maybe people had cold feet about that. As mentioned, I had also
spoken to an animator involved, and that was the impression I received too, a lot of conflicted
feelings in spite of criticism. Steven stuck by his guns following the video, though also
sticking by his word that he doesn't seek to make another. He's posted a few more statements here
and there that have been pretty consistent, mainly about the point regarding animators, and obviously
why he wanted to speak about it. It seems that any of Steven's conflicted feelings prior to Dan's
video have gone out the window, which I think has disappointed fans further, but in a situation like
this, there's no point in faking something that doesn't exist. Jay's video was since removed,
and Jay has since deleted his presence from the internet, presumably because of certain
allegations surrounding various inappropriate sexual behaviour, including grooming, which
I just want to escape at this point. He did post a response, denying these fairly vehemently though,
as most of the screenshots and the document that held them are now gone, it's hard for me to really
provide a balanced opinion. As a minor caveat, I did find one of the documents. I'm still kinda
confused, Jay's been up to some comradery, I'm not sure if it's as incriminating as implied.
Regardless, I'll leave them in the reference document in case anyone wants to try and make
sense of them. I won't add too much more, other than his exit doesn't appear to have been motivated
by the DanPlan situation specifically. Does this compromise his credibility? Not necessarily,
unless you feel there's an element of deceit, or similar traits, in his behaviour which may
be transferrable. As such, it's hard to comment. Jay's side was just perspective, and although it
was important, there are other more important points to take away. When we reflect on DanPlan,
there is a significant lack of evidence that answers people's questions. A lot of questions
about people's characters and so on, especially the accusations, for example, is Daniel manipulative?
Maybe. These DMs that he posted in his own video do seem strangely worded. Amongst other things,
one statement that always stuck out to me said, I treated you so much better. This one always rubbed
me the wrong way, because who the hell says that if they're not trying to manipulate you? Of course,
that's not an argument of positivity, he may just hold himself in higher regard, and it would be
transparent, and thus it's not conclusive. But it's a really weird thing to say to someone,
even someone whom you have treated well. A lot of other comments, I can see why they would be
manipulative, but I can also see why they may not be. You have to ask yourself, could a rational
person reply this way? For a lot of the comments, my answer was yes, so you can't jump to the
conclusion that someone is malicious just because they say something that could be manipulative.
It's true that Daniel could just say certain things in an attempt to butter others up to
stop them from speaking out if he knows they might make a video, but it's also something he might say
if he genuinely wants to remain friends. It's about how you know Daniel, and I don't know him
well enough to make that judgement, though I will provide my opinion very soon. Other questions
about contradictions, such as Stephen saying there's a long negotiation phase, and Daniel
framing it as if he just came back and accepted $100 per video, seeming conclusive. Some DMs show
that Dan was nice to Stephen at points, but what that niceness represents, we cannot be sure.
Was Stephen's video the only option? Was other people's treatment at stake? And was it worth it?
The truth is, you can't really answer these questions with what we've been given,
but I do think there are some things you can take from the situation.
One of the more unfair statements that Daniel made in his video was this one.
Stephen says that he's worried that they'll be jobless from this. If he really thought this,
he would not have made that video when he did, because when he quit we had a conversation,
and in the conversation I told him that there's a lot of videos in progress that he is in,
and that we're in the progress of making them, so I will be announcing that he is leaving after
those videos are posted. This was for the sake of the animators that are working hard to make
these videos complete, and he understood that it might take a while. But regardless, he made a
video two weeks after he quit, and so now we can't post the videos that he is in. They were all still
working in progress, and now they will never see the light of day because of the actions that he
took. Of course, I'll be paying the animators full amount that we pre-agreed on, even if they
didn't finish the video. It's not their fault. We can't post these videos, and I still want to
compensate them with the agreed amount that we made, and I'll ask them if the amount is okay
again, and if they're not, then we'll meet somewhere. But that's not the important part.
The important part is that what they made will never see the light of day because Stephen decided
to make the video so quickly, even though he knew we were still in progress of making
many videos that he was in.
Now, this is pretty unreasonable considering Stephen stated that he doesn't mind any videos with
him being published after his exit. Although I understand why you may not want to release
previous videos with someone you have bad blood with, that is ultimately your decision as much
as his was to release the video. It's a shared responsibility. Daniel also does a fair bit of
paraphrasing here, and if you look at the DMs, all it really shows is Stephen saying he wants
the videos out as soon as possible rather than having them spaced out, even though he also says
he's okay with them being published. I think Stephen made his point pretty clear in the
messages, and Daniel's interpretation is rather uncharitable. The tone it's done in is pretty
incendiary, and it seems like he's looking for an excuse to end the series there. This didn't have
to be the series ending video. Dan chose to make this video series ending. It wouldn't have been
difficult to make a video saying, I'm sorry, I got some things wrong, I probably did underestimate
the efforts of those around me, but I do feel that people have got my intent wrong, and I'm gonna do
better to prove it. The DanPlan audience would have been more than happy with a video like that,
they wanted this situation to heal. Dan chose to kamikaze it by making an equal amount of character
indicting statements against Stephen. Does that mean he's guilty? Not at all, he may just be
defending his pride. But pride comes at a cost, and Dan decides to pay the price, and hell, he can
probably afford it. The amount of money that an audience friendly animation channel will make
from ad revenue alone is monumental, and then you consider merch and sponsorships, it'll be
ridiculous. On the other hand, YouTube can be unpredictable, and having all your eggs in that
basket would probably make you a bit more frugal than some careers would. I understand that,
and I wanted to empathise with him on the basis of the fact that running a team costing and being
consistent can be a challenge, but at the same time, his self-superior attitude towards it is
if it's some monumental undertaking that suddenly entitles him to such a mammoth share of the
channel, it's something that I couldn't personally connect with. It doesn't help that one of the
other allegations was that he paid some of the manual work a surprisingly low amount.
It was contradictory logic to many people.
It's not true. Ever since the company was made at the beginning of last year,
I have taken zero dollars from the company. This doesn't mean I haven't taken money from the past
before the company was made. It doesn't mean I won't take money out from the company in the
future. But I was more invested and reinvesting into the channel and the community, and I was more
focused on putting the money there. But clearly, it seems like now that I just take all the money
and run away with it."
Besides the rather pointless nature of that statement, it doesn't change the fact that
how much he paid himself wasn't the problem. He could donate it all to charity, and it wouldn't
change the point. It's proportionately how much was made and how much other people who contributed
a significant amount to the channel brand saw. Now, regardless of how ridiculous I would consider
it, I mean, a hundred dollars a video for someone in that position is unbelievable. If both parties
agree to it, force aside, most people will say that's responsibility taken on by both sides.
So obviously, there is the question regarding how much negotiation took place, and there's very
little evidence shown. But regardless of the claims, it makes sense to me that Steven probably
ended up settling for less due to a motive outside of that which is financial. Daniel is very careful
in each of his statements, and I don't doubt that he probably has negotiated with artists from time
to time and come to an agreement, but it doesn't seem implausible that Hosuh may have argued
generally with Daniel regarding payments and wages too, and I find the use of legality as a reason
not to discuss such to be rather unconvincing. I do receive the impression that Daniel is quite
headstrong, and I think the fact that he never really recognised the sheer imbalance in that pay
is a testament to it. If you consider someone more than an employee, then pay them like one. He was
essentially a contracted guest, and that gave him no loyalty. Daniel was motivated to keep the
channel structured as it was. I think he did have a bias towards people he viewed as quote originals,
especially if he gave Hosuh a cut against the dude's own will. He was stubborn, and I wouldn't
doubt that when confronted, he used the power of his authority to appeal to his sense of business,
and knowing what's best, which is where this shoutout fan-off style idea came from, maybe from
the good old gaming days. I don't think Dan uses these ideas to insult people as Jay felt. I
received the impression it was likely a legitimate passion that he had tunnel vision about. I don't
think Dan had menacing intentions, he just thought he knew what was best because he was the channel
owner, and the channel was his, but he failed to realise that the By The Way series brought Stephen
into the picture, and no amount of side videos, almost all of which underperformed, could really
change that. Stephen isn't business minded, I think he just wanted some more credit, in whatever form.
Now, there are nuances to this dispute, given it was rooted in a confrontation that both sides
framed quite differently, and we know it was a volatile argument, and we can say things in the
heat of the moment. Daniel did apologise for his rage very shortly after it, but the resolution
was clearly not the end, no deal can help you move past something like that. Daniel may have viewed
his outburst as a moment of frustration, but Stephen saw it as the slipping of a long war
masquerade, comments that remain stuck in his head for months to come. By the time he left the channel,
he had grown bitter, to the extent that he wanted to make Daniel pay, he wanted to be heard, and he
clearly didn't think he could be heard from the inside. Should he have brought it up with Daniel
prior? Maybe if he cared about Daniel knowing, but at that point he didn't. Stephen wanted first blood,
and he got it.
Stephen- Do I think me and Dan will be friends? Do I have any intentions on being friends again?
No. I've burned this bridge and I don't intend to rebuild it.
Now, at this point, Stephen can't really put on the I reached out to Daniel narrative, because he
can't expect to be treated any differently to how he treated Daniel. There's no honour amongst
thieves, but before we could even have that discussion, Jay's video left a further dent
in the already tarnished reputation, it fit in thematically with Stephen's narrative, and provided
even more detail, some of which would be confirmed by Dan's own video a few days later,
some of which would be contradicted. Dan's video may have originally been an emotional tell all
of one side, but by the time the second stream came out, it became a case of who was going to
scorch the most earth. Daniel's video may have rationalised his perspective, but there was little
closure, even with the evidence and screenshots, you receive the impression that these two cowboys
were riding on different wavelengths, and you may find yourself on either. If you are more of a
classical liberal, you may well have sided with Dan. To some people, I'm sure Dan's deals were
just business, whether he was a dick to people or not, people consented, and he was part of the
market, even if the market was flawed, yet you could be the most Machiavellian mortal in existence,
and still acknowledge that Dan ultimately failed, because he torpedoed his own flagship series in
the name of pride. The image of Dan Plan was based on something inherently antithetical to how the
drum portrayed it. A channel always will have some underlying business elements, but if fraternity
is a selling point, then these videos were just not compatible with it. Dan recently revamped the
channel to pursue a new direction, one that I think he is more comfortable with, and will probably
reflect his interests a little more. I wish him the best with that, and maybe he did truly see
opportunity within the destruction, but as many other creators have found, it is often hard to
rebrand with an audience who have come to expect something, so I would manage expectations over the
coming months, and focus on making content that you enjoy, regardless of what other people say.
Don't go out of your way to justify yourself.
I'm at a state where I have to explain myself for wanting to charity, because I'm so worried that
people are just going to be like, oh, anything he does now, he's just doing it for his... No,
I've been doing charity before this drama happened, and I will continue to do charity after this
drama happened. I don't care what you think of me, alright? This doesn't fix anything. If I was a bad
person, I am a bad person. If I was a good person, I am a good person. Doing a charity is only good
because you're doing a charity, everybody should be doing charity. If you can't afford it, don't
donate, okay? You should protect yourself first, obviously. But if you can afford it, help each other out.
Two sides hellbent on burning each other down, what we left with? Well, the neutral parties, and they
told their own story too. We already spoke about the animators who were mostly silent, and reticent
about releasing any DMs which support either cause. But what about the friends, the amigos?
What have they said? Well, one of the original members by the name of Anna released a stream
stating her perspective. I'd say it leans towards Dan's side, and of course, there is a limit within
that perspective. She definitely sighs towards his corner. If my video doesn't satisfy on its own,
I'd recommend checking hers out.
I think his intentions were good, but I think it was a little flawed if you look at it in an overall
perspective. His intentions weren't bad at all, like I don't think Daniel's intentions were to like,
oh yeah, I'm just gonna give money to everybody else, and like, not to like my own friends or
whatever. Like, I think his intentions were good, but I think he had to see the overall picture of
what was going on. And what about Hosuh, the fellow founding member of DanPlan who'd been there
through the highs and lows? What did he say? Well, he hasn't made any official statements,
any videos, released any DMs, but he has been streaming a fair bit with Steven, and even sought
to make this comment.
Back in high school, Daniel was like, a really good guy. I respected him, he was great. He knew
how to get along with people, but now he has somewhat changed.
Okay, maybe that's enough.
That's good.
So people change, right?
Yeah.
Okay.
People change, and depending on the circumstances and the factors, I could not foresee it. Like,
people change.
What that means exactly, I'll let you decide.
Another one of my friends, DarthPina, also made a video on the topic that will be linked in the
pinned comment below, which integrates interviews with some fresh perspective. I definitely
recommend checking his take out if you have the chance. In the end, both sides have said their
part, and we shouldn't expect more, but we can always do our best to understand.
It does seem like a divorce, with the channel being torn between two rather determined figures,
and although some people may take a strong side, a lot of people just seem confused and
forlorn, with many coming back to these videos to pay their respects like a YouTube gravestone.
It's sad that some people are just waiting for DanPlan to turn around and say it was a huge prank,
because that's the degree that their perception was shattered. It's phenomenal.
I'd say this topic reminded me of my Spill video, in a way, when I spoke about the corporatisation
of YouTube. In that upload, I noted that once you give the voice of a channel a personality,
people become connected to that as a brand, and that voice has much more power in the future of
the channel as the owner. Today's situation, although not identical, was a test of that,
and regardless of who you side with, audience sentiment was clear. Steven established his
character, and once people began to associate the characteristics with the name, the association
reversed, and people came back not just for the jokes or the banter, but for Steven, as much as
they came back for Hosuh or Daniel, and that sentiment echoed throughout the drama. He wasn't
just a member, he was the member, and the scale of this drama is a testament to that.
DanPlan was a channel which was the passion project of its titular creators, a channel that
brought joy unto many people, and found great success thanks to its dynamic concepts and
energetic interplay between its hosts. It's BTW series, in a way, became synonymous with DanPlan.
If BTW went down, DanPlan was going to face a real challenge in its continuation, and with this new
era, it seems Dan is attempting to reinvent the brand, but with the legacy of BTW engraved in
its identity, one thing is for certain, DanPlan will never be the same.
I'd first of all like to give a thanks to a creator who I really have come to like, by the
name of Antoine. I caught one of his videos on DanPlan, and I reached out to him, and he was
really helpful, and provided me with a resource that I wouldn't have been able to use otherwise
to make this video. So, a massive thank you to Antoine, go check out his channel, he's not making
too many videos right now, but go and send him some love and appreciation, I think he's got a
really good head on his shoulders, and very nice technical style. I have nothing too much else to
say about it, just go and check him out, send him some appreciation, thank you man.
Work in the grind, much respect to them, keep up the great work. I would also like to thank my
patreons, my $10 patreons plus will be up on the screen right now. I want to give a big thanks to my
$50 patreons, we have Amanda, we have Caroline, we have Hypercube, and we have some hullabaloo,
thank you so much for your support, it means a lot. And we also have to give a big thanks to my $100
patreons, and that is Brandon Junck, Christopher Koras, and Yesenia Ramirez. Thank you so much for
your support guys, it means the world to me. If you wanna reach me, Twitter, but I've been quite busy
recently, and obviously you can join my Discord, I must give you a warning, I haven't been using my
Facebook recently, so there's my warning. I don't really have too much else to add, hang in there
guys, I'm sending my love. Keep up the hustle my friends.